>>SEAN STONE: Have we
discovered the forbidden fruit?
Let's enter the "Buzzsaw."
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome to "Buzzsaw," where
we cut through the mainstream
narrative to explore
the hidden truths.
I'm your host, Sean
Stone, and with me today
is Dennis McKenna, who has
a PhD in botanical sciences
from the University
of British Columbia.
His scientific research has
focused on ethnopharmacology
in the Amazon.
He has authored numerous
scientific articles and books,
including co-author
of "The Invisible
Landscape" with his
brother, Terence McKenna.
His most recent book is
called "The Brotherhood
of the Screaming Abyss," where
he chronicles his exploration
into the psychedelic world
with his brother Terence.
Today, he takes us
on our own journey
to discover the
food of the gods.
So with that, I will
begin by asking you,
are mushrooms storied
legendary food of the gods,
in your opinion?
>>DENNIS MCKENNA:
Well, thank you, Sean,
for inviting me
to be on the show.
Are mushrooms the
food of the gods?
Well, you have to
recognize that it's a myth.
[LAUGH]
Right?
But to address the
possible truth of it,
I think that the
human species has
had a very long
relationship with mushrooms.
They evolved in
the same ecologies.
Inevitably, people would
have discovered them
and had the experiences
that they make possible.
And I think they really
did play a role in what you
might call cognitive evolution.
In a certain way, they
taught our species
how to use language in a very
fundamental way, because they
created a world where symbols,
images, and sounds were
connected.
They brought meaning into
the cognitive sphere.
So in that sense, they
were the food of the gods.
They were also the
forbidden fruit,
in a certain sense, because they
brought knowledge to a species.
And I believe that
was their role.
And I think you can
make a pretty good case
that that was going on,
granting certain assumptions.
>>SEAN: Right.
So the idea is that aside from
people picking up mushrooms
and randomly trying them,
eating them, hallucinating,
there actually were
entire religions based
around use of the mushroom,
or at least mushroom
as an initiatory practice
within a religious--
>>MCKENNA: Well,
that came later.
I think the discovery of the
mushrooms, which was initially
probably accidental-- you've
got a situation where you've
got essentially hungry
primates scanning
the environment for anything
that might be edible.
And these mushrooms
are in the tropics.
Psilocybe cubensis, the
pantropical magic mushroom,
psilocybin mushroom, is not
shy about being noticed.
It's a very spectacular,
large-looking mushroom.
So you know, they
would notice it.
And being hungry or just
simply being curious,
they would consume it, and
that would make the connection,
you know, to this unseen realm
that they would discover there.
And religion, and
to a certain extent,
shamanism were
artifacts, inventions
that we had to create
in order to deal
with this alternate reality.
I think that's the
way to think of it.
The religions came later.
Psychedelics are not
religions in themselves,
but they activate
religious sensibilities.
And we can now
actually correlate that
to neuroanatomy and
neurophysiology.
There are studies now under way
where the mystical experience,
so-called mystical experience
can be reliably induced
by psilocybin and
other psychedelics.
But psilocybin is
ideally for studying
this in the scientific context.
So mystical experiences
used to be something
that people would strive for,
hope for, and spend years
meditating and self-flagellating
or whatever, in the hopes
that they might at
some point be blessed
with a mystical experience.
We can now reliably induce
a mystical experience
in 20 milligrams of psilocybin
in the right circumstances.
Any schmuck can have
a mystical experience.
You don't have to be a saint.
It might make you a saint.
>>SEAN: Right.
But that's an interesting
point, because many people
would argue that there's
a particular break, a very
demarcated break between
the present religions that
are very much anti-drug and
the ancient realm, the pagan
realm, which seemed to have
utilized mystical experiences
and psychedelic experiences.
Do you think that the
modern religions actually
were predicated in
initial drug use
to have the visions of
the prophets of the past,
and then the modern religions
basically came and clamped down
to make sure no one else
could access the gods,
and basically had to
create a control structure?
>>MCKENNA: You took the
words right out of my mouth.
That's exactly what
I think happened.
I think that the roots
of these religions
was based in
psychedelic experience
and actual personal
experience and ecstasy.
And as they evolved into
structured institutions
based on dogma and ritual and
all that, the spiritual power,
the numinosity was
even eviscerated out
of those religions.
They are now hollow
shells, in a certain way.
They're not about bringing
people closer to God anymore.
They're about getting people
to accept a set of beliefs
that may or may not be true.
And if they look
at them closely,
there's a lot to be questioned
about these dogmatic precepts.
So religions have
evolved or devolved,
is perhaps a better word, into
institutions for controlling
people's behavior.
Like so many institutions, it's
all about controlling people's
thought.
The last thing they want
their adherents to have
is a mystical experience.
Real, genuine
mystical experiences
are dangerous to the
established power structures.
>>SEAN: Because do you think
that the mystical experiences
actually help promote
and perpetuate peace
within a society?
>>MCKENNA: Well, they help pro--
yeah, they help promote peace.
They help promote different
ways of relating to each other.
They help people to think
for themselves, essentially.
They help people-- you know,
you don't have to be a priest.
You don't have to be an even
particularly good person
to have a psychedelic
experience that,
by all intents and purposes,
is a mystical experience.
And religions, like
most institutions,
they want to take that power
away from the individual.
It's like, only the
priests get to have--
talk directly to God, if
you want to put it that way.
They'll tell you what you're
supposed to think about this.
You don't get to go talk to God.
And so in a sense, these
mystical experiences
and psychedelics
as general, they're
dangerous in that sense.
Not that the drugs are
particularly dangerous.
The drugs are remarkably
safe in the physiological,
toxicological sense, as
long as certain common sense
guidelines are followed.
They're dangerous because
they give you dangerous ideas.
Like back in the '60s, we
saw this, the influence
that LSD was having on society.
And people were thinking, now,
why should I go to Vietnam
and kill somebody I don't know
just because my government
tells me to?
So it encourages
self-responsibility,
and individual thought.
This is not convenient
for power structures.
They want people to be nice,
consumer, obedient consumer
robots.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SEAN: So would you
recommend any number
of these hallucinogenics
from LSD to ayahuasca
to mushrooms, peyote?
I mean, basically recommend
anything to anyone?
Or would you say
that these should
be done within a context of
more of a religious experience,
under certain guidance?
>>MCKENNA: Well, I certainly
wouldn't recommend them
to anyone.
I mean, they need to be
used in a context that's
very important.
Ever since the '60s,
the earliest people,
Leary and those people,
emphasized the importance
of set and setting.
Setting being the setting.
Needs to be appropriate.
And then the set is
what you bring to it,
everything you might be,
but also preparation.
They should be approached
very thoughtfully.
These are powerful experiences,
life-transforming experiences,
often.
The outcomes can be fantastic.
People have said, for
example, of ayahuasca,
one ayahuasca session is
like 10 years of therapy.
I don't know if I
would go that far,
but definitely, these things can
open up the mind and the heart
and allow for insights and
real therapeutic changes
that talk therapy takes
much longer to get there,
and pharmacotherapy, as it's
practiced by the psychiatric
and the conventional psychiatry
doesn't really address at all.
You know, most of the panoply
of psychopharmaceuticals
are either ineffective
or barely effective
or effective in a much
smaller group of people
than they're prescribed to.
And you know, if we want to get
off onto that tangent, which
we may, I think
psychiatry, you know,
relies far too much
on those things,
and we need to find some way
to reintegrate psychedelics
into psychiatry.
>>SEAN: Precisely.
We know now that opioids
are killing more Americans
than cars or drugs, right?
So what are the
alternative paths
for people to take
as far as drugs
that you're talking
about, for example,
that are not pharmaceutical
to prescribe drugs?
>>MCKENNA: Well, you mean
for that kind of therapy?
>>SEAN: For depression,
you know, like,
people dealing with depression
issues, for example.
>>MCKENNA: These psychedelics,
under the right circumstances,
can be used to treat
and actually resolve--
cure, if you want
to use that term--
a number of things, ranging
from intractable depression
to addictions to post-traumatic
stress, and even other things
that you might not expect like
cluster headaches, for example,
and that sort of thing.
So there is a range of
things that psychedelics
can be used to treat and cure.
And they're very
prevalent in our society,
because I think, you
know, these medicines,
these psychedelics are
medicines of the spirit,
in a certain way.
They treat spiritual
dysfunctions.
And as a culture, we're wounded.
We are spiritually wounded.
And so it's not surprising that
the individuals in that culture
are also spiritually wounded.
And people feel, I believe, that
their spiritual institutions
are not supporting them.
They may go to church on Sunday.
Perhaps some get a
spiritual satisfaction.
Many people feel like spiritual
institutions are hollowed out.
They don't really
address their needs,
and they're so
spiritually bereft,
this is why they
might be motivated
to go to South America or go
someplace and take ayahuasca.
These are not drug-crazed
hippies looking for a thrill.
These are usually
fairly thoughtful people
who want a really personally
meaningful experience.
And psychedelics can
provide that to them
under the right circumstances.
>>SEAN: Precisely.
>>MCKENNA: But that said, not
everyone should take them.
I mean, there are people,
schizophrenics primarily,
other people who probably
shouldn't take psychedelics
if they have a genetic
proclivity for psychosis
and that sort of thing.
There are other techniques that
can approach the same thing
like holotropic breathwork,
and those people
should look at
those alternative.
>>SEAN: Right.
So we have a
question, for example,
from one of our audience.
Danielle from Canada asks,
what kind of compounds,
if there are any
compounds, that you
can use that will take you to
hyperspace without affecting
your mental clarity?
>>MCKENNA: I was kind of amused
by that question, actually.
[LAUGHTER]
I don't know what
to say to that.
If you're going to
go into hyperspace,
your mental clarity is
going to be effective.
There's no way around it.
>>SEAN: I think
certain people have--
I guess there are
different degrees of,
for example, I know
if you smoke DMT,
it's sort of a
20-minute journey,
and then you pretty much
come back, and you're in one.
Whereas with LSD, for example,
I think people can drop acid
and still function,
and that can actually
be very detrimental to your--
to actually hurting
yourself if you actually
try to function on LSD.
Whereas if you do
something like ayahuasca,
you're pretty much
lying down, resting.
You're not going
to be able to move.
>>MCKENNA: This is just this
issue of set and setting.
>>SEAN: Yes.
>>MCKENNA: The important
thing to emphasize
is that the set and the
setting is important.
The setting should be
a place that you don't
have any responsibilities.
You can focus on the experience.
Because the essence of
the psychedelic experience
is something that happens
between you and the medicine.
You know, we talk of the
shaman or the curandero
or the therapist as the
teacher or whatever.
But really, it's not.
The medicine is the teacher.
And it's the encounter
between the person
and the medicine in that
very intense personal space
that the therapeutics goes on.
A good therapist
or a good shaman
will have the wisdom and
the experience to know--
to step back from that.
They are just there to
facilitate the encounter.
And if the person gets into
a state of high anxiety
or needs reassurance
or something,
they're there to help with that.
They're not there to
control the session.
I mean, many times, they
will take that role,
but you're not with the right
therapist, in my opinion.
They have to have confidence
and trust enough in the medicine
to let the medicine do its work.
You know, psychedelics
are like something
that no one can do
it for you, you know?
No one can be born for you or
die for you or have sex for you
or do any of these
personally meaningful things.
You have to do it.
>>SEAN: Precisely.
>>MCKENNA: Psychedelic
is like that.
>>SEAN: It's your journey.
>>MCKENNA: It's your journey.
>>SEAN: But towards
this notion of--
we're talking about very
extreme psychedelics, right?
These are like ayahuasca and
LSD and mushroom experiences.
They're relatively extreme.
Whereas I'm hearing
about things now,
things like hemp
oil that you can
take, things like
microdosing of mushrooms
that people use to try to
combat ADD, for example,
and help you focus.
Do you think this might
be the way of solving
a lot of our issues
with opioid addiction
by going towards a microdose
of some of these hallucinogens?
>>MCKENNA: Well,
there are psychedelics
that can be used
to treat addictions
that are particularly
good for that,
ibogaine being one of the ones.
It's particularly effective
for opiate addiction.
It's not a typical psychedelic
in terms of its pharmacology.
Most psychedelics work only
on serotonin receptors,
pretty much primarily
on serotonin receptors.
Ibogaine works on a
variety of receptors.
What it does that none
of the others do is
it specifically interrupts
the cravings for opiates,
for a temporary period after--
the usual process is that
people get a high-dose session
with ibogaine.
This is in no way recreational.
This is an ordeal, which may
last as long as 36 hours.
But the person will have
often a review of their life
and where they
went wrong, and how
they might find their way back.
And so there's a lot
of material to process.
But then for about
anywhere from a week
to even a month or
even two, in what they
call the afterglow of
the ibogaine experience,
a person has no
cravings for opiates.
So their life does not revolve
around that for a while.
So depending on what
preparation they've
made for what happens
after the session,
it can be effective or not.
They have to realize
that after the session,
they have to change
where they live,
their friends, their habits,
everything so that they
can take advantage of that.
Say, this is going
to change my life,
and I am ready to move
into this new life.
>>SEAN: Precisely.
Precisely.
I mean, the idea of--
>>MCKENNA: It's so easy to fall
back into the world of habits,
of the same old--
>>SEAN: Well, the idea of
psychedelics is not just that
you're going to take
a psychedelic drug,
and you're going to--
your mind is going to be blown.
You'll be transformed
and cleansed
and then you're going to go
about your life as before.
It's like, the idea is that it's
a spiritual journey we're on.
And these are--
I would understand it as
these are sort of hints.
These are hints about
the spiritual landscape
that we're really
in, and they're there
to help guide us, right?
But you mentioned before
about the spiritual vacuity
of America, this
idea that we are
in this place of spiritual loss.
And I'm just curious as
to why you think that is.
You think that we're more
sick than other societies,
or it's just every society
has this level of sickness?
>>MCKENNA: Well, I think--
[LAUGH]
I think that globally,
we're spiritually bereft.
But I think in
the United States,
in the so-called
developed world,
we're perhaps more
spiritually bereft
than even in developing
countries for multiple reasons,
you know?
I mean, for one thing,
in developing countries,
the family structure
is different.
Now in our country, people are
separated from their families.
Families' traditions
are not as important.
Frankly, honestly,
it's hard for me
to discuss this without
bashing religion,
because I put a lot of that
at the feet of religion
in the sense that
truly, it's not about--
any longer about fostering
people's spiritual development.
It's about regulating
their behavior
and insisting they believe
on faith, you know?
That they believe a set
of doctrines or dogma
or pronouncements for which
there's very little evidence,
and good reason to think
there is no evidence.
And there's this
insistence on that.
And I think a key difference
between psychedelics
and religion is psychedelics
don't demand faith.
You do not have to have faith.
In fact, it's
better if you don't.
You can be a skeptic
as much as you want.
What you have to
have is courage.
You have to have courage to
put your assumptions aside
and accept the experience,
and take it in and process it
for whatever it means for
you, and evaluate that.
And it's either meaningful
personally or not.
You can get help with your
interpretation of that.
You can talk to people
like me or my brother.
Well, you can't talk
to my brother anymore.
But there are many,
many people who
are ready to tell
you what it means.
But my main message
is only you know
what it means because of
this intense personal nature.
You don't need Terence
McKenna or Dennis McKenna
to tell you what it means.
>>SEAN: And that's the
opposite of religion, right?
The idea that you individually
choose for yourself
what it means to you,
rather than listening
to someone else's dogma, someone
else's teaching and saying, no.
You explore and experience
it for yourself.
>>MCKENNA: It's the
antidote to religion.
>>SEAN: You know God
for yourself, right?
That's a very personal
experience of God that religion
normally doesn't teach.
But you talked about the '60s
and '70s and the exploration
of LSD helping to combat
the militarism of the time
with Vietnam.
But we've seen America become
reactionary in a certain sense.
Do you think that we have
become an armed madhouse,
despite the awakening
of the '60s and '70s?
Or are there any--
is there any evidence that
that awakening did actually
help to expand our
minds, our consciousness,
that it has done positive
gains for America?
>>MCKENNA: Well, I think it
was a net positive thing.
But if it was an
awakening, it was aborted.
It crashed and burned,
because it was mostly
about LSD, which sort
of dropped like a bomb
into society, which was already
in turmoil at that point.
We had no tradition.
We had no reference
point for LSD.
The ancient,
indigenous traditions
were not known to most people.
And in fact, one of the good
effects of the early '60s
was that these traditions
were rediscovered, you know?
But we had no way.
Even the people advocating
them and the people
that were against
them didn't really
realize the sort of spiritual
and cultural potency
of something like LSD.
What's changed now
is that we have
had 45 years or more to learn
how to use these things.
We've rediscovered the
indigenous traditions.
Because if you want to know
how to use these things,
talk to the people that have
used them for 10,000 years.
They know a thing or two.
We can't whole-- you
know, wholly just
co-opt these traditions.
I think that's the
wrong approach.
But we can borrow from them.
They can take and we
can build our own sort
of neo-shamanic, 20th century
context for using them.
We've gotten a lot smarter about
how to use them in a sense.
Also I think a
big thing that has
made a difference is it's not
about one substance anymore.
There are many, and
many of them are plants.
And that was lacking
from the last one.
It was LSD or nothing.
A lot of people didn't even know
there were plants out there.
But now the phenomenon that you
see, mushrooms, which of course
is not a plant, but we'll
let it be a plant honorarily.
But natural forces.
So you don't have to have
huge infrastructures of labs
and synthesis and distribution.
The contemporary
psychedelic movement
is something that
happens in gardens.
People grow plants.
They exchange them
across the back fence.
They teach other people
how to grow them,
how to prepare them,
how to use them.
So it's a much more organic
and less threatening
kind of spread of this
knowledge into the culture,
because it's associated with a
plant or more than one plant.
And essentially, it's
a symbiosis, right?
They call these things plant
teachers or plant allies.
And I think that
is literally true.
That's a perfect
way to describe it.
>>SEAN: Don't you think
we should have everyone
who serves in government,
who becomes a public servant,
have to take some kind of plant
medicine upon entering office?
>>MCKENNA: Ideally, yes.
[LAUGHTER]
If they would.
If they could be
persuaded to, I think
it would do them a lot of good.
>>SEAN: Right.
But I mean, especially,
I was going to say, like,
with prison systems.
Don't you think that's one
aspect of reforming the prison
system would be to help--
>>MCKENNA: The structured use
of something like ayahuasca
or MDMA or something
in a prison context
would be tremendously
useful, and is being done,
but it's not being
done here. ayahuasca's
being used in Brazil
in prisons, you know,
because there are several
churches in Brazil that
use ayahuasca.
Some of them are
here in the States,
and they're the
only ones allowed
to use ayahuasca legally.
But they have an
ethical framework,
and part of their good
works is to help prisoners.
And they do go in, and they
use ayahuasca with prisoners,
and they have good results.
You know, politicians,
many of them could benefit.
But in the first
place, politicians
tend to be people who are
quite rigid in their worldview.
They're very much in the mindset
of, our minds are made up.
Don't confuse us with facts.
[LAUGH]
You know, don't upset what
we already know to be true,
or believe to be true.
So they're resistant to it.
And the other
thing is, I think--
you know, I think the
problem is that politics
is a profession that tends
to attract sociopaths.
>>SEAN: Yes.
>>MCKENNA: And my
curandero, the one I've
been working with the last few
years, extremely wise fellow.
And I asked him, so
who don't you treat?
Who won't you let
into your sessions?
And he said, there are
two people, two kinds
of people I can't help.
One is schizophrenics and
the other is sociopaths.
He said, ayahuasca will
not help sociopaths,
nor any psychedelic.
And this is
worrisome, because we
would like to think that
our political leaders would
have this revelation,
and it would change them.
But if you're a sociopath,
your structures are too well--
you know, you're not open
to actual personal change
and evolution.
>>SEAN: And
unfortunately, these are
the ones who are controlling
the criminalization of drugs,
for example, and
controlling the system that
makes these drugs into
class I drugs, for example.
Do you have any hope
that we're going
to see these drugs, these
hallucinogens basically taken
off of the schedule
of being criminal--
considered criminal drugs,
and being utilized as,
you know, by doctors, by
alternative psychiatrists
and whatnot?
>>MCKENNA: Yes.
I think that is going to happen.
It is already happening.
I don't know what
the timeframe is.
But there's more research
now on psychedelics
than there's been in
the last 40 years.
Good, solid research.
Very, very tightly controlled
clinical studies, and all that.
In the 45 years that's passed or
so since these drugs were kind
of banned in a blanket
sense, you know,
we've gotten better science.
We know how to design
better clinical studies that
are more evaluative.
And so slowly,
slowly, the data--
and even not so
slowly now-- that data
is accumulating that
these substances can
be used therapeutically.
For example, MDMA for trauma.
And trauma, post-traumatic
stress syndrome,
is so prevalent.
And then there's a
huge national need
for that associated with
the veterans, and so on.
So MAPS, one of
the organizations
that's doing this research,
has focused on MDMA.
They just got FDA
approval for what's
called a Phase III trial.
That's many thousands of
subjects, multiple centers.
That's the final phase
in a clinical study
before the drug can be approved
as a prescription medicine.
And they are there now.
They've got that approval.
But then that's also the
most expensive, the longest.
It takes millions of dollars.
But they've gotten
to this point.
That's because the data is good.
Same with psilocybin.
The nonprofit that
I'm affiliated with,
Heffter Research
Institute, which
just gets much less
attention than MAPS,
but also does very
effective work,
and we've focused
some psilocybin.
And we're bringing in psilocybin
to kind of the same place.
One of the areas where our
research has pointed to
is the use of psilocybin
to relieve anxiety,
and existential anxiety
in the terminally
ill to help them come
to terms with the fact
that they're dying, and actually
to use the power of psilocybin
to reliably induce these
mystical experiences.
So I think psilocybin
is going to be accepted
for various things in
medicine, but initially
probably for the use in the
hospice situations, you know?
Because that is-- it's easier
to fast track a drug like that,
because you're giving
it to dying people.
And psilocybin happens to be
quite nontoxic and compatible
with human metabolism,
so you can give it
to people who are ill
without danger, you know?
And one of the things,
again, coming back
to this sort of spiritual
bereftness of our culture,
medicine is also
spiritually bereft.
Medicine has exorcised
spirit out of itself,
and since about 150 years ago.
The model is, we're
just machines.
Apply the right
molecular monkey wrench,
and you can fix the machine.
It doesn't work like that.
Spirit is a component
of human existence,
and that's why reintroduction
of these psychedelics
into medicine is so important.
Because in order
to do that, you've
got to reintroduce
spirit into medicine,
and you have to
acknowledge, there
is no separation
between spirit or mind,
if you want to call
it that, and body.
It's a holistic system.
If you treat the
disorders of the mind,
you can treat the disorders
of the body, and vice versa.
That's why something
like ayahuasca's
so often used
effectively for what we
think of as physical illnesses.
>>SEAN: Yeah.
But again, that gets
back to the idea
of the individual, the personal,
subjective experience, which
is all in the face of the idea
of mechanistic, repetitive
science that can be
applied to anybody.
We have to appreciate
the universe that--
the individual personality is
not a universal personality.
>>MCKENNA: This
is only something
that can be done with the
individual in especially
tailored situations.
That's why you've got to
use psychedelics effectively
in medicine.
This is never going to be
about, take two and call me
in the morning.
This is about--
the therapist has
to be totally focused,
intensely involved
with the person over
a period of time,
whether that therapist is a
traditional psychotherapist
or a curandero, or some
combination of the two.
I think that's
where psychiatry is
going to evolve if these
substances are ever
accepted into medicine.
20 years from now,
the psychiatry
is going to look a
lot like shamanism.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SEAN: And that's the key.
>>MCKENNA: That is the key.
>>SEAN: I really
appreciate your time today.
Thank you so much
for joining me.
>>MCKENNA: Thank you.
Thank you very much.
It was a pleasure, Sean.
>>SEAN: Thank you.
Thank you.
And there you have it, folks.
Fascinating insights
from Dennis McKenna.
You may not agree with or
believe everything said here
today, so I urge you to check
out his website, heffter.org.
That's H-E-F-F-T-E-R .org.
Remember, the road to
truth is a perilous path
along the buzzsaw's edge.
It requires constant
reassessment.
I'm your host, Sean Stone.
You are the revolution.
[THEME MUSIC]